---
layout: post
title:  "The Ice Age: A Very Short Introduction"
author: "Jamie Woodward"
---

22,000 years ago, at the time of the last glacier maximum, what is now New York was under thousands of feet of ice and much of Europe was treeless tundra. This "ice age" wasn't a one-time event. For the past 35 million years, the earth has repeatedly fluctuated between cold periods where glaciers overtake much of the Northern latitudes and warms periods like the time we are in now. This fluctuation cycle is on the order of 100,000 years.

Yet the earth has not always been like this. For most of the earth's 4.6 billion year history, it has been too warm for ice sheets to form, even at the poles. Geologists have identified only six glacial epochs, periods of sustained glacial activity that last several million years, such as the one we are in now.

While a traditional textbook would spend most of its pages explaining the above--the current best understanding of our climate's history--this book instead spends a majority of its pages explaining how we have arrived at this current understanding.

Events are set off by the discovery of mammoth fossils and then later frozen, preserved mammoth wool and skin. This leads to the establishment of extinction as scientific fact in the early 1800s. Then during the 1800s, geologists try to explain the mystery of erratic boulders--large rocks found in places that defy rational explanation, far from their source and sometimes raised far above their source's elevation. How do we weigh evidence in the present to explain past events? This complex question is the crux of this book.

Some geologists used the evidence of erratic boulders as confirmation of the biblical flood. Other geologists advocated a principle of *uniformity*, explaining the evidence using only processes that we can observe in the present day albeit at large time scales and discounting theories that relied on abrupt catastrophic events beyond human experience. Yet the theory of glaciation--that large ice sheets freezing and melting over time were responsible for moving the boulders--required that the earth's climate changed over time, an idea largely rejected by the mainstream uniformitarian geologists of the 1800s. 

These issues were debated for decades. Mainstream thought shifted both with the discovery of new evidence--such as the geological exploration of North America--as well as with each new generation of geologists. Each geologists' life experiences also shaped the theories and explanations they put forth. For example, many of the ideas around glaciation theory came from scientists who spent time in the Alps and observed the effects of glaciers on the landscape.

Unlike many science books, this one shows a vivid picture of what the process of science is actually like, in all its complexities. Because of this, I now have an understanding of both the current theory as well as the reasoning leading up to it. On the other hand, I found some of this history tedious such as descriptions of personal issues such as fights over priority and giving credit for discoveries. This social history gives insight into some of the ego issues of scientists and how this affects the development of science, an important topic but perhaps one for a separate book.

My favorite part of the book is chapter 8, on the revolutionary discoveries of the 1970s using measurements of oxygen isotopes in deep ocean sediments to produce a much more precise picture of our climate history. Woodward's explanation of how this technique works (as well as other methods such as radiocarbon dating) is exceedingly lucid. I also appreciated the explanation of the celestial cycles theory of climate change which correlates various astronomical cycles on the order of tens of thousands of years with changes in climate. These cycles were precisely calculated by Milutin Milankovitch with just a paper and slide rule while he was a prisoner of war for four years! The correlations in periodicity were later confirmed by the oxygen isotope measurements.

I read this book because I wanted to better understand climate change in our current context. Here's my take: On one hand, the earth's climate has shifted dramatically in the past and life adapts fairly quickly (that is, over a thousand years). Animals and plants that are better suited for warm or cold weather will gain or lose territory over these cycles but they generally survive through them, an exception being mammoths and other arctic fauna driven to exctinction in the current warm period, likely with human hunters implicated. I was surprised to learn that some of the temperature shifts on record were extremely rapid: greater than 10°C in less than a decade! On the other hand, atmospheric CO2 levels--which are closely and consistently correlated with global temperature--never went above 280 parts per million during previous warm periods. They are now above 400 parts per million due to our burning of carbon energy sources. It is not clear the causality connections in this correlation--there are likely feedback effects in both directions--but we are currently in uncharted territory since at least 50 million years ago (when the ocean was 60 feet higher than today).
