---
layout: post
title:  "The Gutenberg Galaxy: The Making of Typographic Man"
author: "Marshall McLuhan"
---

McLuhan's thesis is that our media determine how we think, how we experience the world, and thus our entire conception of reality. Media create the environment we experience, and it's easy to take that for granted -- to not realize that people in the past, with different media environments, experienced the world in completely different ways.

For example, before the printing press, the concept of authorship -- keeping track of who originally wrote a passage and using that knowledge to critically evaluate the ideas -- was nonexistent or at least very different than our concept of it today. When a scholar dies today, you might enter her study and see on a shelf all of her finished works and on her desk all of her notes -- scraps of paper, unfinished ideas, perhaps passages copied from other works. But in the Middle Ages, when all writing was written and copied by hand, you would not have this distinction between finished and unfinished. Everything was essentially notes, and it was often not clear which notes were copies of other notes.

Any works that were shorter than book length would be bound together ad hoc with other works. That is, as scribes finished copying works, or writing original works, the monastery's librarian would collect these together and bind them into a book. One work might be bound together with different works depending on the library. If a passage referred to another passage, it was more important to the reader how to *find* that passage -- by writing a series of letters to another monastery hoping to borrow a particular volume -- than to know who originally wrote the passage or under what circumstance. Indeed the question of who *wrote* a passage usually meant who physically copied those letters -- which the librarian could often tell as each scribe had his own distinctive handwriting.

The closest modern-day analogy I can think of is Tumblr. People scrapbook images, quotes, and memes that they like. These then get copied to other people's Tumblrs and that's how ideas move through the medium. There are some conventions for tracking provenance but it's not really the point where the thing originally came from and people don't put much effort into it. (I suppose Twitter is like this as well, though Twitter is probably better characterized as a beer hall -- an oral, not written environment -- scaled up to be everywhere all the time.)

Another example I like is that before printing, writing was always meant to be read aloud. Before the monastery system employed scribes as full-time book copiers, to make a living as a writer meant to make a living as a performer. You would write a work so that you could rent out a venue and orate in front of an audience. The success of a work was how well the audience responded. The analogy I like to think of is composing music. Composers write a score so that their music can be performed. They don't write it so that people can read copies of the score silently to themselves. The transition to silent reading must have seemed as bizarre as composing music without ever intending it to be heard. In the Middle Ages, scribes were separated into cubicle-like recesses in the cloister so that they could read aloud without disturbing each other. There are some references to people reading completely silently as if it were some prodigal skill.

Other claims McLuhan makes in this book about media environments and the ways they shaped people's reality include: Before the alphabet, people did not see in three dimensions. Writing goes hand in hand with settling down -- nomadic people could not invent writing. There was little demand for furniture before the printing press. "The public" did not exist before the printing press.

Some of these claims are better supported than others. Most would be hard to prove or disprove, though I have tried to lay out reasonable arguments for the two examples above. But McLuhan is not so much interested in convincing the reader whether these claims are right or wrong. They're more like "zingers", like Zen koans. The point is to consider the implications if the claim were true, and in doing so you come into awareness of long-held assumptions about how the world "is". For example, people did not used to write with spaces. There was no conception of separate words -- people just used a stream of letters to directly transcribe sounds. The historical contrast helps you see how malleable our conceptions of language -- of thought -- can be. And how our current conceptions are so determined by our present media environments. In the future, what will people look back on the way we look back and think: Really? They didn't have *words*?

This book is not easy to read. It consists of extensive quotations, probably half the book. These are often from difficult to read sources: Shakespeare, James Joyce, Francis Bacon. Latin quotes go untranslated. McLuhan adopts what he calls a "mosaic" approach, attacking ideas from multiple angles as opposed to building a linear argument.

McLuhan uses the bodily senses to frame his interpretation of media, which I find useful. Pre-alphabetic cultures are oral/aural -- the world is experienced through the ear. Contrast the spoken word experienced through the ear -- it has inflections of emotion, is immediate, and is usually personally directed to you -- with the written word experienced through the eye -- it is intended for a non-specific reader, detached from emotion, and can be scanned, read, or reread in any order. The phonetic alphabet is a turning point because for the first time it allows the possibility of one sense to be directly translated into another sense. McLuhan contrasts this with ideographic alphabets like classical Chinese which he claims are more a visual language for visual thoughts, not oral thoughts. However, since writing is still read aloud through the manuscript era, there is a balance between eye and ear. Print shifts the balance heavily to the eye. His example: the way one scans a newspaper is completely different than any kind of oral communication. Electronic media -- which would be radio and TV at that time -- are mentioned throughout but not heavily analyzed in this book. McLuhan claims they shift the sensory balance back to the ear and touch sensation.

Although he defines the dominance of any one sense as hypnosis, McLuhan insists that he is not trying to make any moral value judgements on any particular medium. Because gaining awareness of a medium is so difficult, especially the media that surround us and that we take for granted, he advises that making premature moral judgements will cloud one's awareness of the medium's true effect.

Indeed a medium's effects are often paradoxical. Print lead to individualism, nationalism, and consumerism simultaneously. Individualism through the idea of authorship -- the notion that one could state an individual point of view, rather than just reading and restating collective knowledge. Nationalism (people previously identified by family or city) by making vernacular languages visible, allowing people to see the differences or similarities in how people spoke and then standardizing on a few of these, resulting in nations. Consumerism by commodifying thought -- interchangeable movable type -- and by creating a mass market for commodified goods -- the printing press as assembly line.
